== Ajax Filtered Fields ==

Author: Francesco Banconi <[mailto:francesco.banconi@gmail.com francesco.banconi@gmail.com]>

== 1   Introduction ==

Theese fields may be used in a many to many or foreign key relation, where the user may want to apply filters to the listed objects, because of they being too many, or just for usability reasons.

== 1.1   Technical details ==

When the user clicks on the chosen filter, an *Ajax* request is sent. It returns the matching elements in *JSON* format. The *jQuery* Javascript library is used.

== 2   Installation ==

The `ajax_filtered_fields` package, included in the distribution, should be placed on the *Python path*.

== 3   Usage ==

As a usage example, let's put the *MyModel* model in a many to many relation with the *RelatedModel* one, via the `related_models` field.

copy to your media directory the Javascript file ajax_filtered_fields.jsincluded in `media/js/` within the distribution;

add this line to your Django project's `urls.py`:

{{{
(r'^ajax_filtered_fields/', include('ajax_filtered_fields.urls')),
}}}

in the model form, choose the field you want to use, reference the formerly copied Javascript file, the jQuery library and the *django admin*'s Javascript code that mutates the *select* widget into a *selectfilter* one:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import AjaxManyToManyField
from django.conf import settings

    class MyModelForm(forms.ModelForm):
        # lookups explained below
        related_objects = AjaxManyToManyField(RelatedModel, lookups)

        class Meta:
            model = Model

        class Media:
            js = (
                settings.ADMIN_MEDIA_PREFIX + "js/SelectBox.js",
                settings.ADMIN_MEDIA_PREFIX + "js/SelectFilter2.js",
                '/path/to/javascripts/jquery.js',
                '/path/to/javascripts/ajax_filtered_fields.js',
            )
}}}

if the form is being used outside of the auto generated django admin, you have to load several *django admin*'s Javascript files from the page where the field will be shown:

{{{
{% load adminmedia %}
<script type="text/javascript" src="/admin/jsi18n/"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="{% admin_media_prefix %}js/core.js"></script>
}}}

if your form is used by *non-staff users* (e.g. in the frontend of your site)
then {{{<script type="text/javascript" src="/admin/jsi18n/"></script>}}} will
not work (due to permission problems).

A simple work around to resolve the problem is to directly point a 
url to the view by including the following line in the urls.py:

{{{
(r'^dynamic-media/jsi18n/$', 'django.views.i18n.javascript_catalog'), 
or 
(r'^dynamic-media/jsi18n/$', 'django.views.i18n.null_javascript_catalog'), 
}}}

depending on whether or not you use the i18n 

and then referencing the new url in place of 
{{{admin/jsi18n/}}} in the page where you need an ajax filtered field.


if you want i18n for *ManyToManyByLetter*, *ForeignKeyByLetter*, *ManyToManyByStatus*, *ForeignKeyByStatus*, *ManyToManyByRelatedField* and *ForeignKeyByRelatedField* fields (see below for details about available fields), add `'ajax_filtered_fields'`to the `INSTALLED_APPS` in your *settings.py*. The only languages currently available are English and Italian.

== 4   Available fields ==

== 4.1   AjaxManyToManyField ==

Base many to many form field class that displays filter choices using jQuery Ajax requests.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import AjaxManyToManyField
# in the form
related_objects = AjaxManyToManyField(
    model, lookups, default_index=0, select_related=None, *args, **kwargs)
}}}

Arguments:

 * *model*: the related model

 * *lookups*: a sequence of `(label, lookup_dict)` specifying object filtering, e.g.:

{{{
(
    ('active', {'is_active': True}),
    ('inactive', {'is_active': False}),
)
}}}

 you may specify what you want in `lookup_dict`, give multiple filter lookups for the same choice and also set a choice that gets all unfiltered objects, e.g.:

{{{
(
    ('some stuff', {'field1__startswith': 'a', 'field2': 'value'}),
    ('all stuff', {}),
)
}}}

 if only one choice is specified, then that one is applied to the listed objects and no choices links are displayed in the html output. This makes the field useful if you want to limit available choices.
 
*New in version 0.5:*

{{{lookups}}} can also be a callable that returns a sequence of {{{(label, lookup_dict)}}}
(this is useful when your lookups must be evaluated at runtime).


 * *default_index*: the index of the lookup sequence that will be the default choice when the field is initially displayed. Set to *None* if you want the widget to start empty;

 * *select_related*: if not *None*, the resulting querydict is performed using `select_related(select_related)`, allowing foreign keys to be retrieved (e.g. useful when the unicode representation of the model objects contains references to foreign keys).



You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by the Django *Field* class.

== 4.2   ManyToManyByLetter ==

A subclass of *AjaxManyToManyField* that displays filters based on initials of a field of the objects, as they are typed by the user.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import ManyToManyByLetter
# in the form
related_objects = ManyToManyByLetter(model, field_name="name")
}}}

Arguments:

 * *model*: the related model;

 * *field_name*: the name of the field where the initial letters are looked up.



You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by *AjaxManyToManyField*.

== 4.3   ManyToManyByStatus ==

A subclass of *AjaxManyToManyField* that displays filters based on the activation status of the objects.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import ManyToManyByStatus
# in the form
related_objects = ManyToManyByStatus(model, field_name="is_active")
}}}

Arguments:

 * *model*: the related model;

 * *field_name*: the name of the field that manages the activation of the object,



You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by *AjaxManyToManyField*.


== 4.4   ManyToManyByRelatedField ==

*New in version 0.5:*

A subclass of *AjaxManyToManyField* that displays filters based on a related field 
(foreign key or many to many) of the object.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import ManyToManyByRelatedField
# in the form
related_objects = ManyToManyByRelatedField(model, field_name, include_blank=False)
}}}

**E.g.**: you have a Band with a lot of Albums, each Album is related
(using a foreign key or a many to many relation) to one or more Types 
("ep", "lp", "demo"...) and, in the Band form, you want to filter albums by type.::

{{{
albums = ManyToManyByRelatedField(Album, "types")
}}}
  
Arguments:

- *model*: the related model;
- *field_name*: the name of the field representing the relationship 
  between the model and the related model
- *include_blank*: if not *False* is displayed a NULL choice for
  objects without relation ({{{field_name__isnull=True}}}).
  The label of the choice must be specified as string.

You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by
*AjaxManyToManyField*.

== 4.5   AjaxForeignKeyField ==

Base foreign key form field class that displays filter choices using jQuery Ajax requests.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import AjaxForeignKeyField
# in the form
related_objects = AjaxForeignKeyField(
    model, lookups, default_index=0, select_related=None, *args, **kwargs)
}}}

It takes the same arguments as *AjaxManyToManyField*, refer to *AjaxManyToManyField* documentation for details.

== 4.6   ForeignKeyByLetter ==

A subclass of *AjaxForeignKeyField* that displays filters based on initials of a field of the objects, as they are typed by the user.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import ForeignKeyByLetter
# in the form
related_objects = ForeignKeyByLetter(model, field_name="name")
}}}

It takes the same arguments as *ManyToManyByLetter*, refer to *ManyToManyByLetter* documentation for details. You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by *AjaxForeignKeyField*.

== 4.7   ForeignKeyByStatus ==

A subclass of *AjaxForeignKeyField* that displays filters based on the activation status of the objects.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import ForeignKeyByStatus
# in the form
related_objects = ForeignKeyByStatus(model, field_name="is_active")
}}}

It takes the same arguments as *ManyToManyByStatus*, refer to *ManyToManyByStatus* documentation for details. You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by *AjaxForeignKeyField*.

== 4.8   ForeignKeyByRelatedField ==

*New in version 0.5:*

A subclass of *AjaxForeignKeyField* that displays filters based on a related field 
(foreign key or many to many) of the object.

Usage:

{{{
from ajax_filtered_fields.forms import ForeignKeyByRelatedField
    # in the form
    related_objects = ForeignKeyByRelatedField(model, field_name, include_blank=False)
}}}

It takes the same arguments as *ManyToManyByRelatedField*, 
refer to *ManyToManyByRelatedField* documentation for details.
You may also pass all the other *args* and *kwargs* accepted by
*AjaxForeignKeyField*.


== 5   Settings ==

Set `AJAX_FILTERED_FIELDS_AUTH_DECORATOR = None` in your project settings if you want to allow public access to the *views.json_index* view. Otherwise set it as an auth decorator callable (eg: *django.contrib.auth.decorators.login_required*). Default is *django.contrib.admin.views.decorators.staff_member_required*.

== 6   Javascript Events ==

The *ajax_filtered_fields.data_loaded* event is triggered (by the selector the Ajax Filtered Field refers to) when the ajax request is completed, the json data is loaded and the options are fully displayed. If you need, you can bind the event easily using *jQuery*, e.g.:

{{{
$("#select_id").bind(ajax_filtered_fields.data_loaded, function(e) {
    // do the voodoo
});
}}}


